REGULATION (EU) 2024/1689 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL
of 13 June 2024
laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act)

Article 1
Subject matter

1. The purpose of this Regulation is to improve the functioning of the internal market by laying down a uniform legal framework in particular for the development, the placing on the market, the putting into service and the use of artificial intelligence systems (AI systems) in the Union, in accordance with Union values, to promote the uptake of human-centric and trustworthy artificial intelligence (AI) while ensuring a high level of protection of health, safety, fundamental rights as enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights, including democracy, the rule of law and environmental protection, against the harmful effects of AI systems in the Union, and to support innovation.

Article 2
Scope

1. This Regulation applies to:
(a) providers placing on the market or putting into service AI systems or placing on the market general-purpose AI models in the Union, irrespective of whether those providers are established or located within the Union or in a third country;
(b) deployers of AI systems that have their place of establishment or are located within the Union;
(c) providers and deployers of AI systems that have their place of establishment or are located in a third country, where the output produced by the AI system is used in the Union.

2. For AI systems classified as high-risk in accordance with Article 6(2), this Regulation applies to operators of AI systems.

Article 3
Definitions

1. For the purposes of this Regulation, the following definitions apply:
(1) "AI system" means a machine-based system that is designed to operate with varying levels of autonomy and that may exhibit adaptiveness after deployment, and that, for explicit or implicit objectives, infers, from the input it receives, how to generate outputs such as predictions, content, recommendations, or decisions that can influence physical or virtual environments;
(2) "provider" means a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body that develops an AI system or a general-purpose AI model or that has an AI system or a general-purpose AI model developed and places it on the market or puts the AI system into service under its own name or trademark, whether for payment or free of charge;
(3) "deployer" means a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body that uses an AI system under its authority except where the AI system is used in the course of a personal non-professional activity;
(4) "high-risk AI system" means an AI system referred to in Article 6.

Article 5
Prohibited AI practices

1. The following AI practices shall be prohibited:
(a) the placing on the market, the putting into service or the use of an AI system that deploys subliminal techniques beyond a person's consciousness or purposefully manipulative or deceptive techniques;
(b) AI systems that exploit any of the vulnerabilities of a natural person or a specific group of persons due to their age, disability or a specific social or economic situation;
(c) AI systems for biometric categorisation of natural persons based on their biometric data to deduce or infer their race, political opinions, trade union membership, religious or philosophical beliefs, sex life or sexual orientation;
(d) AI systems for real-time remote biometric identification of natural persons in publicly accessible spaces for law enforcement purposes, with limited exceptions;
(e) social scoring systems by public authorities;
(f) AI systems used to predict the likelihood of a natural person committing a crime solely based on profiling.

Article 6
Classification rules for high-risk AI systems

1. Irrespective of whether an AI system is placed on the market or put into service independently from the products referred to in this paragraph, that AI system shall be considered to be high-risk where both of the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a) the AI system is intended to be used as a safety component of a product;
(b) the product covered by that safety component is required to undergo a third-party conformity assessment.

2. In addition to the high-risk AI systems referred to in paragraph 1, AI systems referred to in Annex III shall be considered to be high-risk. High-risk areas include:
(a) biometric identification and categorisation of natural persons;
(b) management and operation of critical infrastructure;
(c) education and vocational training — determining access or assigning persons to institutions;
(d) employment, workers management and access to self-employment — recruitment, CV screening, promotion, task allocation, performance monitoring;
(e) access to and enjoyment of essential private services and public services and benefits;
(f) law enforcement, border control, and administration of justice.

Article 9
Risk management system for high-risk AI systems

1. Providers of high-risk AI systems shall establish, implement, document and maintain a risk management system for high-risk AI systems.

2. The risk management system shall consist of a continuous iterative process run throughout the entire lifecycle of a high-risk AI system, requiring regular systematic review and updating. It shall comprise:
(a) the identification and analysis of the known and the reasonably foreseeable risks that the high-risk AI system can pose to health, safety or fundamental rights when used in accordance with its intended purpose;
(b) the estimation and evaluation of the risks that may emerge when the high-risk AI system is used in accordance with its intended purpose, and under conditions of reasonably foreseeable misuse;
(c) the evaluation of other risks arising from the analysis of data gathered from the post-market monitoring system;
(d) the adoption of appropriate and targeted risk management measures in accordance with the provisions of the following paragraphs.

Article 10
Data and data governance for high-risk AI systems

1. High-risk AI systems which make use of techniques involving the training of AI models with data shall be developed on the basis of training, validation and testing data sets that meet the quality criteria referred to in paragraphs 2 to 5 whenever such data sets are used.

2. Training, validation and testing data sets shall be subject to appropriate data governance and management practices. Those practices shall concern in particular:
(a) the relevant design choices;
(b) data collection processes and the origin of data, and in the case of personal data, the original purpose of the data collection;
(c) relevant data-preparation processing operations, such as annotation, labelling, cleaning, enrichment and aggregation;
(d) the formulation of relevant assumptions, notably with respect to the information that the data is supposed to measure and represent;
(e) an assessment of the availability, quantity and suitability of the data sets that are needed;
(f) examination in view of possible biases that are likely to affect health or safety or lead to discrimination prohibited by Union law.

Article 13
Transparency and provision of information to deployers

1. High-risk AI systems shall be designed and developed in such a way as to ensure that their operation is sufficiently transparent to enable deployers to interpret the AI system's output and use it appropriately.

2. High-risk AI systems shall be accompanied by instructions for use in an appropriate digital format or otherwise, that include concise, complete, correct and clear information that is relevant, accessible and comprehensible to deployers. The information shall specify:
(a) the identity and contact details of the provider;
(b) the characteristics, capabilities and limitations of performance of the high-risk AI system;
(c) the level of accuracy, including its metrics, and the relevant accuracy measures;
(d) any known or foreseeable circumstance related to the use in accordance with its intended purpose or under conditions of reasonably foreseeable misuse, which may lead to risks to the health and safety or fundamental rights;
(e) the human oversight measures and the technical measures put in place.

Article 14
Human oversight of high-risk AI systems

1. High-risk AI systems shall be designed and developed in such a way, including with appropriate human-machine interface tools, that they can be effectively overseen by natural persons during the period in which the AI system is in use.

2. Human oversight shall aim at preventing or minimising the risks to health, safety or fundamental rights that may emerge when a high-risk AI system is used in accordance with its intended purpose or under conditions of reasonably foreseeable misuse.

3. The oversight measures shall be commensurate with the risks, level of autonomy and context of use of the high-risk AI system, and shall be ensured through either one or both of the following types of measures:
(a) measures identified and built, when technically feasible, into the high-risk AI system by the provider before it is placed on the market or put into service;
(b) measures identified by the provider before placing the high-risk AI system on the market or putting it into service and that are appropriate to be implemented by the deployer.

Article 26
Obligations of deployers of high-risk AI systems

1. Deployers of high-risk AI systems shall take appropriate technical and organisational measures to ensure they use such systems in accordance with the instructions for use accompanying the systems.

2. Deployers shall assign human oversight to natural persons who have the necessary competence, training and authority, as well as the necessary support.

3. Deployers of high-risk AI systems shall ensure that the input data is relevant in view of the intended purpose of the high-risk AI system.

4. Where deployers have reason to believe that the use of the AI system in accordance with its intended purpose may present a risk within the meaning of this Regulation, they shall inform the provider or distributor and the relevant market surveillance authority without undue delay.

5. Deployers of high-risk AI systems shall keep the logs automatically generated by that high-risk AI system to the extent such logs are under their control, for a period appropriate to the intended purpose of the high-risk AI system, of at least 6 months, unless provided otherwise in applicable Union or national law.

6. Deployers of high-risk AI systems listed in Annex III, with the exception of AI systems listed in point 2 thereof, shall, prior to putting those systems into use, carry out a fundamental rights impact assessment.

Article 50
Transparency obligations for providers and deployers of certain AI systems

1. Providers shall ensure that AI systems intended to interact directly with natural persons are designed and developed in such a way that the natural persons concerned are informed that they are interacting with an AI system.

2. Providers of AI systems, including general-purpose AI systems, generating synthetic audio, image, video or text content, shall ensure that the outputs of the AI system are marked in a machine-readable format and detectable as artificially generated or manipulated.

3. Deployers of an AI system that generates or manipulates image, audio or video content constituting a deep fake shall disclose that the content has been artificially generated or manipulated.

4. Deployers of an AI system that generates or manipulates text which is published with the purpose of informing the public on matters of public interest shall disclose that the text has been artificially generated.

Article 99
Penalties for infringements

1. Non-compliance with the prohibition of the AI practices referred to in Article 5 shall be subject to administrative fines of up to EUR 35,000,000 or, if the offender is an undertaking, up to 7% of its total worldwide annual turnover for the preceding financial year, whichever is higher.

2. Non-compliance of the AI system or general-purpose AI model with any requirements or obligations under this Regulation, other than those referred to in Article 5, shall be subject to administrative fines of up to EUR 15,000,000 or, if the offender is an undertaking, up to 3% of its total worldwide annual turnover for the preceding financial year, whichever is higher.
